# Heat-CVD-UHI-Dashboard

## Brief Project Description
This is the code and data for an R Shiny dashboard, which is associated with the manuscript 'Urban Heat Island Impacts on Heat-Related Cardiovascular Morbidity: A Time Series Analysis of Older Adults in US Metropolitan Areas'. The dashboard is an interactive supplemental material and allows for interaction with the manuscript's primary results - the heat-related cardiovascular risk and burden across the urban cores of 120 contiguous US metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), 2000-2017, for the entire study population, different subpopulations, and in low and high urban heat island intensity (UHII) areas. It also allows for interaction with the MSA-level heat-related risk and burden, overall and in low and high UHII areas, and exploration of the ZIP code-level temperature, UHII, and Medicare hospitalization data used in the analyses. The dashboard displays a variety of interactive tables and figures and the results displayed in the dashboard can be downloaded. Details on the datasets and methods used as well as a discussion of all results and sensitivity analyses can be found in the associated manuscript. At present, the dashboard can be viewed here: https://rstudio-connect.dmap-stage.aws.epa.gov/content/c0b492eb-2c37-4018-a0d3-a4563b9add51/. For any questions, please email: cleland.stephanie@epa.gov or rappold.ana@epa.gov.

### Manuscript Abstract
<i>Background.</i> The United States (US) population largely resides in urban areas where climate change is projected to increase temperatures and the frequency of heat events. Extreme heat has been linked to increased cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk, yet little is known about this association across urban heat islands (UHIs).<br> 
<i>Objective.</i> To identify the US urban populations at the highest risk of heat-related CVD morbidity and characterize the heat-attributable burden. <br>
<i>Methods.</i> We obtained daily counts of CVD hospitalizations among Medicare enrollees, aged 65-114, in 120 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in the contiguous US between 2000-2017. Local average temperatures were estimated by interpolating daily monitor observations. A quasi-Poisson regression with distributed lag non-linear models was applied to estimate MSA-specific associations between temperature and hospitalization. These associations were pooled using multivariate meta-analyses. Stratified analyses were performed by age, sex, race, and chronic condition status in low and high UHI intensity (UHII) areas, estimated from satellite-derived temperatures in urban versus non-urban areas. We also calculated the number of CVD hospitalizations attributable to heat. <br>
<i>Results.</i> Extreme heat (99th percentile, ~28.6°C) increased CVD hospitalization risk by 1.5% (95% CI: 0.4%, 2.6%), with considerable MSA-to-MSA variation. There were an estimated 37,028 (95% CI: 35,741, 37,988) heat-attributable admissions, with most due to extreme temperatures. The risk difference between high and low UHII areas was 1.4% (2.4% [95% CI: 0.4%, 4.3%] in high vs. 1.0% [95% CI: -0.8%, 2.8%] in low). High UHII accounted for 35% of the total burden and disproportionately impacted already heat-vulnerable populations, with a higher heat-related risk and burden among female, Black, and older (age 75-114) enrollees and those with diabetes and chronic kidney disease.<br>
<i>Conclusions.</i> Extreme heat increases the risk and burden of cardiovascular morbidity among older adults in US urban areas. UHIs exacerbate the adverse impacts of heat, especially among those with existing vulnerabilities.

### Disclaimer
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) GitHub project code is provided on an "as is" basis and the user assumes responsibility for its use. EPA has relinquished control of the information and no longer has responsibility to protect the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of the information. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation or favoring by EPA. The EPA seal and logo shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by EPA or the United States Government. 
